List view in PF4 (#205)
openshift/openshift-origin-design: web-console/knikubevirt/list-view-pf4/list-view-pf4.md

# List View in PF4

This PR describes the changes made in list view in the Virtualization Console when applying them into PF4.

## VM List

The VM list contains columns for the following:

* Name
* Namespace
* Status
  * Running, Off, Error (with custom messages), Cloning, Migrating, Importing, Warning, Pending (with changes that will apply after restart), Unknown
* Created
  * Date formatting should follow OpenShift’s console, viewable here and here
  * If possible, a tooltip should appear on hover with the exact creation date, including year.
* Node
* IP Address

### Max number of columns and prioritization

We set 6 columns to be the max number we will display in list views. We also determined priorities/usefulness of each column and set the priority order from left to right.

![VM list six columns](img/vmlist.png)

### Status Popovers and Icons

Statuses should be colored blue to indicate that they can be hovered and/or clicked.

> Hovering over a blue status should display a status popovers with a brief description of the issue or underlying process. Clicking on a ‘Learn more’ link should bring the user to the VM’s Events page for more details.

Reviewer: Should be click/tap. Hovering should only underline the blue status text.

Another note - “Learn more” with the external link icon (seen below in the Guest Agent example) should link to external documentation, not the VM’s Events page. “View details” without the external link icon would be more appropriate if the status is an error, for example, and clicking would bring the user to the Events page.

Rather than explaining the Status Popover pattern in this documentation section, maybe we should include a collection of what various generic status popovers should look like? One for Error, one for Creating, one for Cloning, etc.? Or maybe those would be included throughout other documentation pages, in which case this section isn’t needed.

> Hovering over a blue status should display a status popovers with a brief description of the issue or underlying process. Clicking on a ‘Learn more’ link should bring the user to the VM’s Events page for more details.

Author: +andybraren thanks for your comments. 
As for the comment about the status popovers, I added a generic explanation (from the PF documentation) that explains how popovers should look like.

The status popovers are replacing the status tooltips from PF3 because they're significantly more accessible on mobile and easier to copy/paste from.

![status popovers instead of tooltips](img/statuspopovers.png)

> We replaced the old lightning bolt icon for ‘Running’ with fa-refresh icon .

Reviewer: I’m not sure this needs to be mentioned.

## Filtering

### Item filters

The predefined filters in the filter bar can be used to narrow the VM list by most statuses. The user clicks each filter to toggle it on and off.

![Filter only the VMs with errors](img/itemfiltererror.png)

### Search filter

The generic search filter allows the user to filter results by any text string in any column. This could enable users to quickly find a VM by IP address or possibly other fields in the future. Multiple filters could be delineated by a comma in the search query.

![Search filter](img/searchfilter.png)

## Sorting

Sorting by columns is possible for any data table variation. Enabling the component within a table eases the ability to scan and read through the content. This option is favored over adding sorting functionality to the toolbar.

![Sorting](img/sorting.png)

> Sorted column: when a column is being sorted by, the column header will turn blue and the sort icon will represent the direction of the sort. Subsequent clicks on the sortable column header will toggle the direction of the sort.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sorted column: when a column is being sorted, the column header will turn blue and the sort icon will represent the direction of the sort. Subsequent clicks on the sortable column header will toggle the direction of the sort.
```

> Sorted column: when a column is being sorted by, the column header will turn blue and the sort icon will represent the direction of the sort. Subsequent clicks on the sortable column header will toggle the direction of the sort.

Reviewer: This section seems to describe the overall pattern of how all tables in OpenShift can be sorted. Since it’s not specific to the VM List, maybe this section can be removed?

Hovered sort: when a column is sortable, the sort icon will appear to the right of the column header. Upon hover, the icon will change to a darker grey indicating that the icon is actionable.
Sortable column: when a column is sortable, the sort icon will appear to the right of the column header in a light grey color. Sorting will not become active until the user selects the column header. This triggers the arrow to point upwards and the content to be sorted in ascending order.

![Sorting with examples](img/sorting2.png)

## States and Actions

> When a VM is off, the actions kebab contains options to Run, Edit, Migrate, Clone, Create Template, Take Snapshot, and Delete the VM.

Reviewer 2: These options should be sentence case "Create Template" = "Create template"

![Dropdown when the vm is off](img/vmlistdropdownoff.png)

> When a VM is running the Run option is replaced with two dropdowns for Power and Connect to Console.

Reviewer 2: `Connect to console` should have a caret to denote dropdown.

![Dropdown when the vm is running](img/dropdownpower.png)

The Power dropdown contains options to Suspend, Restart, or Shut down the VM. Because these are potentially destructive actions, clicking any of these options will display a modal for the user to confirm.

![Confirmation modal](img/confirmationmodal.png)

> The modals for Restart and Shut down include an additional button to “Force” the action. They also include warnings about the possibility for data loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The modals for Restart and Shutdown include an additional button to “Force” the action. They also include warnings about the possibility for data loss.
```

![Restart modal](img/restartmodal.png)

> ![Shutdown modal](img/shutdownmodal.png)

Reviewer 2: I think all instances of `Shut down` should be `Shutdown`

Reviewer: Not sure about this. `shutdown` is often used in CLIs because it’s easier to type, but “Shutdown” is technically a noun and “Shut down” is a verb. Windows, macOS, Fedora, and VMware vSphere all seem to use “Shut down” in their GUIs. oVirt uses “Shutdown” but I’d argue that should be changed.

> # List View (updated)

Reviewer 2: we can probably remove the `(updated)`

## VM List

The VM list contains columns for the following:

* Name
* Namespace
* Status

>   * Running, Off, Error (with custom messages), Cloning, Migrating, Importing, Warning, Pending (with changes that will apply after restart), Unknown

Reviewer 2: Can we add Snapshotting here

* Created
  * Date formatting should follow OpenShift’s console
  * If possible, a tooltip should appear on hover with the exact creation date, including year.
* Node
* IP Address

### Max number of columns and prioritization

We set 6 columns to be the max number we will display in list views. We also determined priorities/usefulness of each column and set the priority order from left to right.

![VM list six columns](img/vmlist.png)

### Status Popovers and Icons

[The Resource status](http://openshift.github.io/openshift-origin-design/web-console/4.0-designs/status/status)

Statuses should be colored blue to indicate that they can be clicked/tapped.
Hovering should only underline the blue status text.

> Hovering over a blue status should display a status popovers with a brief description of the issue or underlying process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clicking on a blue status should display a status popovers with a brief description of the issue or underlying process.
```

Clicking on the "Learn more" with the external link icon (seen below in the Guest Agent example) should bring the user to external documentation for further details.
“View details” without the external link icon would be more appropriate if the status is an error, for example, and clicking would bring the user to the Events page.

> The status popovers are replacing the status tooltips  because they're significantly more accessible on mobile and easier to copy/paste from and they also provide actions that the user can take upon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The status popovers are replacing the status tooltips because they're significantly more accessible on mobile and easier to copy/paste from and they also provide actions that the user can take upon.
```

We replaced the old lightning bolt icon for ‘Running’ with fa-refresh icon.
An asterisk can be appended to the status to highlight a potential issue that the user should be aware of. For example, when the IP address is unavailable because of missing guest agent, the ‘Running’ status will be appended with an asterisk.

## Filtering

### Item filters

The predefined filters in the filter bar can be used to narrow the VM list by most statuses. The user clicks each filter to toggle it on and off.

![Filter only the VMs with errors](img/itemfiltererror.png)

### Search filter

The generic search filter allows the user to filter results by any text string in any column. This could enable users to quickly find a VM by IP address or possibly other fields in the future. Multiple filters could be delineated by a comma in the search query.

![Search filter](img/searchfilter.png)

## Sorting

Sorting by columns is possible for any data table variation. Enabling the component within a table eases the ability to scan and read through the content. This option is favored over adding sorting functionality to the toolbar.

![Sorting](img/sorting.png)

> 1. **Sorted column** when a column is being sorted, the column header will turn blue and the sort icon will represent the direction of the sort. Subsequent clicks on the sortable column header will toggle the direction of the sort.

Reviewer 2: should `name` be blue in the design?

Author: It is the sorted column, right?
